ARROW-15183: [Python][Docs] Add Missing Dataset Write Options (#12112)
apache/arrow: docs/source/python/dataset.rst

based on statistics, but very small groups can cause metadata to be a significant portion
of file size. Arrow's file writer provides sensible defaults for group sizing in most cases.

Configuring files open during a write
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When writing data to the disk, there are a few parameters that can be 
important to optimize the writes, i.e number of rows per file and
number of files open during write. 

Set the maximum number of files opened with the ``max_open_files`` parameter of
:meth:`write_dataset`.

If  ``max_open_files`` is set greater than 0 then this will limit the maximum 
number of files that can be left open. If an attempt is made to open too many 

> files then the least recently used file will be closed.  If this setting is set 

Author: This is another overlapping suggestion. I think the previous suggestion contained the expected idea. What do you think @wjones127?

too low you may end up fragmenting your data into many small files.

The default value is 900 which also allows some number of files to be open 
by the scannerbefore hitting the default Linux limit of 1024. Modify this value 

> depending on the nature of write operations associated with the usage. 

Author: @wjones127 this is a better description. Let me add it.

> 

Reviewer: Sorry I missed this.  This should help.  Multi threading does cause the write_dataset call to be "jittery" but not completely random so this would help with the small files problem though you might still get one or two here and there.

Another important configuration used in `write_dataset` is ``max_rows_per_file``. 

Set the maximum number of files opened with the ``max_rows_per_files`` parameter of
:meth:`write_dataset`.

If ``max_rows_per_file`` is set greater than 0 then this will limit how many 
rows are placed in any single file. Otherwise there will be no limit and one 
file will be created in each output directory unless files need to be closed to respect 
``max_open_files``. 

Configuring rows per group during a write
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When writing data to disk, depending on the volume of data obtained, 
(in a mini-batch setting where, records are obtained in batch by batch)
the volume of data written to disk per each group can be configured. 
This can be configured using a minimum and maximum parameter. 

> 

Reviewer 2: A few points worth discussing:

 * Row groups matter for Parquet and Feather/IPC; they affect how data is seen by reader and because of row group statistics can affect file size.
 * Row groups are just batch size for CSV / JSON; the readers aren't affected.

My impression is that we have reasonable default for these values, and users generally won't want to set these. Can you think of examples where we would recommend users adjust these values?

Author: I guess we can think of logging activities where online activities are monitored in windows (window aggregations) and summaries are logged by computing on those aggregated values. So if we assume such a scenario, depending on the accuracy required for the computation (if it is a learning task) and the required performance optimizations (execution time and memory), the users should be able to tune the parameter. This could be an interesting blog article if we can demonstrate it.

Reviewer 2: Those are good examples.

Could you add a paragraph discussing how `row_groups` affect later reads for Parquet and Feather/IPC, but not CSV or JSON?

system. The default value is 900 which allows some number of files
to be open by the scanner before hitting the default Linux limit of 1024. 

Another important configuration used in :meth:`write_dataset` is ``max_rows_per_file``. 

Set the maximum number of rows written in each file with the ``max_rows_per_files``
parameter of :meth:`write_dataset`.

If ``max_rows_per_file`` is set greater than 0 then this will limit how many 
rows are placed in any single file. Otherwise there will be no limit and one
file will be created in each output directory unless files need to be closed to respect
``max_open_files``. This setting is the primary way to control file size.
For workloads writing a lot of data, files can get very large without a
row count cap, leading to out-of-memory errors in downstream readers. The
relationship between row count and file size depends on the dataset schema
and how well compressed (if at all) the data is. For most applications,
it's best to keep file sizes below 1GB.

Configuring rows per group during a write
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The volume of data written to the disk per each group can be configured.

> This configuration includes a lower and an upper bound. 
> Set the minimum number of rows required to form a row group. 
> Defined with the ``min_rows_per_group`` parameter of :meth:`write_dataset`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration includes a lower and an upper bound.

The minimum number of rows required to form a row group is 
defined with the ``min_rows_per_group`` parameter of :meth:`write_dataset`.
```

Note: if ``min_rows_per_group`` is set greater than 0 then this will cause the 
dataset writer to batch incoming data and only write the row groups to the 
disk when sufficient rows have accumulated. The final row group size may be 
less than this value if other options such as ``max_open_files`` or 
``max_rows_per_file`` force smaller row group sizes.

> Set the maximum number of rows allowed per group. Defined as ``max_rows_per_group`` parameter of
> :meth:`write_dataset`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The maximum number of rows allowed per group is defined with the
``max_rows_per_group`` parameter of :meth:`write_dataset`.
```

> Note: if ``max_rows_per_group`` is set greater than 0 then the dataset writer may split 

Reviewer: There are "[notes](https://sublime-and-sphinx-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notes_warnings.html)" in RST format:

```
.. note:
  
  This is the note content

Resume regular content
```

Perhaps we should use that instead of a regular paragraph here?

up large incoming batches into multiple row groups.  If this value is set then 
``min_rows_per_group`` should also be set or else you may end up with very small 

> row groups (e.g. if the incoming row group size is just barely larger than this value).
> Row groups are built into the Parquet and IPC/Feather formats but don't affect JSON or CSV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
row groups (e.g. if the incoming row group size is just barely larger than this value).

Row groups are built into the Parquet and IPC/Feather formats but don't affect JSON or CSV.
```

I think there is a "note" saying "make sure to set both properties" and then a paragraph talking about how row groups affect downstream readers.  We should, at a minimum, make them two different paragraphs (though we might also make the note a proper "note").

900 files, the total of 1200 files may be over a system limit. (On Linux,
this might be a "Too Many Open Files" error.) You can either reduce this
``max_open_files`` setting or increasing your file handler limit on your
system. The default value is 900 which also allows some number of files
to be open by the scanner before hitting the default Linux limit of 1024. 

Another important configuration used in :meth:`write_dataset` is ``max_rows_per_file``. 

Set the maximum number of rows written in each file with the ``max_rows_per_files``
parameter of :meth:`write_dataset`.

If ``max_rows_per_file`` is set greater than 0 then this will limit how many 
rows are placed in any single file. Otherwise there will be no limit and one
file will be created in each output directory unless files need to be closed to respect
``max_open_files``. This setting is the primary way to control file size.
For workloads writing a lot of data, files can get very large without a
row count cap, leading to out-of-memory errors in downstream readers. The
relationship between row count and file size depends on the dataset schema
and how well compressed (if at all) the data is. For most applications,

> it's best to keep file sizes below 1GB.

Reviewer 2: > As long as the user is creating multiple (reasonably sized) row groups we shouldn't get out-of-memory errors even if the file is very large.
Are we assuming downstream readers are necessarily Arrow? I suggested that based on my experience with Spark, which as I recall, read whole files.

> Also, what evidence do you have for "For most applications, it's best to keep file sizes below 1GB"?
In retrospect, that guidance is a bit low. My previous heuristic target was between 50 MB per file at a minimum and 2 GB as a maximum. That might be more specific to a Spark / S3 context; so maybe not as appropriate here.

> it's best to keep file sizes below 1GB.

Reviewer: Ah, I have no experience with Spark / S3 so that could be entirely true.  Maybe we could just change that sentence into "leading to out-of-memory errors in downstream readers that don't support partial-file reads"

Configuring rows per group during a write
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When writing data to disk, depending on the volume of data obtained, 
(in a mini-batch setting where, records are obtained in batch by batch)
the volume of data written to disk per each group can be configured. 
This can be configured using a minimum and maximum parameter. 

Set the maximum number of files opened with the ``min_rows_per_group`` parameter of
:meth:`write_dataset`.

Note: if ``min_rows_per_group`` is set greater than 0 then this will cause the 
dataset writer to batch incoming data and only write the row groups to the 
disk when sufficient rows have accumulated. The final row group size may be 

> less than this value and other options such as ``max_open_files`` or 
> ``max_rows_per_file`` lead to smaller row group sizes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
less than this value if other options such as ``max_open_files`` or 
``max_rows_per_file`` force smaller row group sizes.
```

I think it is an error if `max_rows_per_file` is less than `min_rows_per_group`.

Set the maximum number of files opened with the ``max_rows_per_group`` parameter of
:meth:`write_dataset`.

Note: if ``max_rows_per_group`` is set greater than 0 then the dataset writer may split 
up large incoming batches into multiple row groups.  If this value is set then 
``min_rows_per_group`` should also be set or else you may end up with very small 
row groups (e.g. if the incoming row group size is just barely larger than this value).

> In addition row_groups are a factor which impacts write/read of Parquest, Feather and IPC

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition row_groups are a factor which impacts write/read of Parquet, Feather and IPC
```

formats. The main purpose of these formats are to provide high performance data structures
for I/O operations on larger datasets. The row_group concept allows the write/read operations
to be optimized and gather a defined number of rows at once and execute the I/O operation. 

> But row_groups are not integrated to support JSON or CSV formats. 

Reviewer: What happens if the dataset is JSON or CSV and this is set?  Is it an error or is this property ignored?

Author: I think this is a good explanation... 

https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/12112#discussion_r831240137

> But row_groups are not integrated to support JSON or CSV formats. 

Author: @wjones127 I added a small para on row-groups. Is this helpful?

Reviewer 2: I think it could use a little more direct advice to help users see the symptoms of when they've done something wrong. Here's my suggestion:

> Row groups are build into the Parquet and IPC/Feather formats, but don't affect JSON or CSV. When reading back Parquet and IPC formats in Arrow, the row group boundaries become the record batch boundaries, determining the default batch size of downstream readers. Additionally, row groups in Parquet files have column statistics which can help readers skip irrelevant data but can add size to the file. As an extreme example, if one sets `max_rows_per_group=1` in Parquet, they will have large files because most of the file will be row group statistics.

Author: This one is much better. I replaced my content with this. @westonpace should we enhance further about CSV and JSON?

Reviewer: No, I think this is probably ok.  Thinking on it further my guess is the user would assume these properties are just plain ignored if writing CSV or JSON which is (more or less) what happens.  So I think this is clear enough.

example, if you are scanning a dataset with 300 files and writing out to
900 files, the total of 1200 files may be over a system limit. (On Linux,
this might be a "Too Many Open Files" error.) You can either reduce this
``max_open_files`` setting or increase the file handler limit on your
system. The default value is 900 which allows some number of files
to be open by the scanner before hitting the default Linux limit of 1024. 

Another important configuration used in :meth:`write_dataset` is ``max_rows_per_file``. 

Set the maximum number of rows written in each file with the ``max_rows_per_files``
parameter of :meth:`write_dataset`.

If ``max_rows_per_file`` is set greater than 0 then this will limit how many 
rows are placed in any single file. Otherwise there will be no limit and one
file will be created in each output directory unless files need to be closed to respect
``max_open_files``. This setting is the primary way to control file size.
For workloads writing a lot of data, files can get very large without a
row count cap, leading to out-of-memory errors in downstream readers. The
relationship between row count and file size depends on the dataset schema

> and how well compressed (if at all) the data is. For most applications,
> it's best to keep file sizes below 1GB.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and how well compressed (if at all) the data is.
```

    # also clean-up custom base directory used in some examples
    shutil.rmtree(str(base), ignore_errors=True)

> Configuring files open during a write

Reviewer 2: I think these sections would actually be best placed next to the "Partitioning performance considerations" section at https://github.com/apache/arrow/blame/master/docs/source/python/dataset.rst#L578

Author: I moved the docs to this section.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When writing data to the disk, there are a few parameters that can be 
important to optimize the writes, i.e number of rows per file and
number of files open during write. 

The number of files opened at during the write time can be set as follows;

.. ipython:: python

    ds.write_dataset(data=table, base_dir="data_dir", max_open_files=max_open_files)

The maximum number of rows per file can be set as follows;

> .. ipython:: pythoin
>     ds.write_dataset(record_batch, "data_dir", format="parquet",

Reviewer 2: I think that space between the directive and code is required.

```suggestion
.. ipython:: python

    ds.write_dataset(record_batch, "data_dir", format="parquet",
```

Author: I replaced this with the short description on the option name and it's functionality ( minor modification to C++ docstring and added here)
